---
title: Notes On Seneca's Shortness Of Life
layout: post
tag: philosophy
---

Seneca presents a Stoic philosophy, that revolves around *"It's not that we have a short space of time, but that we waste much of it."* To live according to your own desires, not your oughts. It reminds me a little bit of Jung when he says that *"to simply achieve that - one's destiny - is the greatest human achievement"*, in reference to self-individuation. 

*"It takes the whole of life to learn how to to live ... it takes the whole of life to learn how to die."* Life is a learning process, a difficult one at that. This is why Seneca proposes that we don't waste it, that we look back at our vices and try to better ourselves, living in accordance with virtue. Also accepting the things that happen to you, and the consequences your actions have on the world. Our *perspective* on our actions and others actions. It reminds me of Viktor Frankl *"Everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms—to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way."* or as Seneca presents it in his essay: *"Mistress Fortune may deal out the rest as she likes; his life has already found safety."*

Seneca draws a stark difference between *living* and *existing*, living may be short and intense - but it is virtuous. Merely existing is only slothful behavior and brings no happiness to others or the person in question, who *does not go gently into that dark night*.

>*"For what if you should think that that man had had a long voyage who had been caught by a fierce storm as soon as he left harbor, and, swept hither and thither by a succession of winds that raged from different quarters, had been driven in a circle around the same course? Not much voyaging did he have, but much tossing about."*
>...
>*"Life will follow the path it started upon, and will neither reverse nor check its course; it will make no noise, it will not remind you of its swiftness. Silent it will glide on; it will not prolong itself at the command of a king, or at the applause of the populace. Just as it was started on its first day, so it will run; nowhere will it turn aside, nowhere will it delay. And what will be the result? You have been engrossed, life hastens by; meanwhile death will be at hand, for which, willy nilly, you must find leisure."*

All of this sounds, at first glance, like a support for hedonism; giving into every desire. I don't see it like this. If we take something that takes much effort to acquire, to become a great poet - does the effort exclude him from this stoic wisdom? I think that as long as the pursuit in *becoming* a poet has intrinsic value, then it has enough value to be virtuous.

Anxiety is endemic to the human condition; therefore, neither prosperity or wretchedness will cure it. Life pushes on nonetheless, we may wish for leisure, for relief, but we would never enjoy it if we don't change our way of thinking. It is impossible to escape the anxiety, but learning to live *with* it instead of pushing back against it, is something that there is tremendous value in. 

### On Tranquility Of Mind

>*"What can happen to one can happen to all."*
> 
>*"Even a calm sea will show some ripples, especially when it has subsided following a storm."*

The philosophy described in *The Shortness of Life* is not a complete description, and as Seneca describes in this essay, it never was, and can never truly be. It is a constant struggle from cradle to grave, a war in which we all must be a diligent soldier on the front-lines. The best way to actively participate, like Plato & Aristotle is of course in political involvement and civic duties. Moreover, Seneca further emphasizes the importance of attitude in the circumstances that befall us:

>*"But perhaps you have become involved in some difficult situation in life in which either public or private circumstances have fastened a noose on you unawares, which you can neither loosen nor snap. You must reflect that fettered prisoners only at first feel the weight of the shackles on their legs: in time, when they have decided not to struggle against but to bear them, they learn from necessity to endure with fortitude, and from habit to endure with ease. In any situation in life you will find delights and relaxations and pleasures if you are prepared to make light of your troubles and not let them distress you. In no respect has nature put us more in her debt, since, knowing to what sorrows we were born, she contrived habit to soothe our disasters, and so quickly makes us grow used to the worst ills. No one could endure lasting adversity if it continued to have the same force as when it first hit us. We are all tied to Fortune, some by a loose and golden chain, and others by a tight one of baser metal: but what does it matter? We are all held in the same captivity, and those who have bound others are themselves in bonds – unless you think perhaps that the left-hand chain is lighter."*

Later he brings up an interesting point, that upon being born we automatically signed a contract where the terms were that we were, one day, to die. Thus, one who fears death is one who breaks the terms of living. A wise man is not exempted by these terms but has decided to live in accordance with them, make the most of the time that *is*, accepting its limitations. The wise man is not removed from positive chances but from their mistakes, because he accepts the fact that things may not turn out as he wished - the mind can cope more easily with not succeeding if you haven't promised certain success.
